Unit I 
Introduction to Marketing Management. 
Introduction: 
The modern view assumes that marketing means identifying, anticipating and satisfying 
consumer’s needs and desires. Thus, marketing creates place utility, time utility and possession 
utility. Marketing is a human activity directed at satisfying needs and wants through exchange 
processes. 
A need is a state of felt deprivation. Marketers create wants on the basis of needs. For example, 
food is an essential to satisfy the hunger needs. Marketers produce various types of food such as 
Pulao, Sweets, Tea, and Coffee etc. to create wants. Creating wants means creating demand for a 
product by providing an opportunity for choice or selection. Here, the buyers have an 
opportunity to select out of the four alternatives–Pulao, Sweets, Tea or Coffee to satisfy their 
hunger needs. The exchange process means the transfer or 
transaction of goods which cannot be made free of cost i.e. it should be on payment basis. 
The process of marketing starts with the identification of needs and wants through market 
survey and converting them into products or services and distributing the same to ultimate 
consumers through buyer oriented channel with suitable sales promotion technique at logical 
price to make a reasonable profit. 
 
DEFINITION OF MARKETING: 
1. Marketing is the performance of business activities that direct the flow of goods and 
services from producer to consumer or user”.–Committee of the American Marketing 
Association. 
2. Marketing is a total system of interacting business activities designed to plan, promote 
and distribute want satisfying products and services to present and potential 
consumers”–W. J. Stanton. 
3. Marketing is the business function that identifies customers’ needs and wants, 
determines which target markets the organisation can serve best, and designs 
appropriate products, services, and programmes to serve these markets”–(Kotler and 
Armstrong, 1996). 
 
 
SCOPE OF MARKETING: 
Marketing has a very wide scope it covers all the activities from conception of ideas to 
realization of profits. Some of them as discussed as below : 
 
- Study of Consumer wants and needs : Goods are produced to satisfy consumer wants. 
Therefore study is done to identify consumer needs and wants. These needs and wants 
motivates consumer to purchase 
- Study of Consumer Behaviour : Marketers performs study of consumer behaviour. Analysis 
of buyer behaviour helps marketer in market segmentation and targeting. 
- Product planning and development : It includes the activities of product research, 
marketing research, market segmentation, product development, determination of the 
attributes, quantity and quality of the products. 
- Branding : Branding of products is adopted by many reputed enterprises to make their 
products popular among their customer and for many other benefits. Marketing manager has to 
take decision regarding the branding policy, procedures and implementation programs 
- Packaging : Packaging is to provide a container or wrapper to the product for safety, 
attraction and ease of use and transportation of the product 
- Channels of Distribution : Decision regarding selection of most appropriate channel of 
distribution like wholesaling, distribution and retailing is taken by the Marketing Manager and 
Sales Manager. 
- Pricing Policies : Marketer has to determine pricing policies for their products. Pricing 
policies differs from product to product. It depends on the level of competition, product life 
cycle, marketing goals and objectives etc 
- Sales Management : Selling is a part of marketing. Marketing is concerned about all the selling 
activies like customer identification, finding customer needs, persuading customer to buy 
products, customer service etc 
- Promotion: Promotion includes personal selling, sales promotion and advertising, right 
promotion mix is crucial in accomplishment of marketing goals 
- Finance : Marketing is also concerned about the finance, as for every marketing activity be it 
packaging, advertising, sales force budget is fixed and all the activities have to be completed 
with in the limit of that budget 
- After sales service : Marketing covers after sales services given to customers, maintaining 
good relationships with customers, attending their queries and solving their problems. 
 
 
MARKETING CONCEPTS: 
 
Different organizations have different perceptions of Marketing. These differing 
perceptions have led to the formation of different concepts of Marketing. There are five 
alternative concepts under which organizations conduct their marketing activities: the 
production concept, the product concept, the sales concept, the marketing concept, and the 
societal marketing concept. 
 
1. The Production Concept: 
 The production concept holds that consumer will favour products that are available and 
highly affordable. Here, production and technology dominate the thinking process of key people. 
They believe that marketing can be managed by managing production. The concept holds that 
consumer would, as a rule, support those products that are produced in great volume at a low 
unit cost. Naturally in such organizations all efforts gets focused on production. Organizations 
favouring this concept are impelled by a drive to produce all they can. They do achieve 
efficiency in production but they do not get best of customer patronage. Customers after all are 
motivated by a variety of alternatives in their purchases. However, production concept as a 
philosophy work undertow situations 
1. When the demand for the product exceeds the supply, management should look for ways to 
increase production  
2. When the products cost is too high, improved productivity is needed to bring it down. 
 
2. The Product Concept: 
 The product concept is somewhat different from production concept. Whereas the 
production concept seeks to win markets and profits via high volume of production and low 
unit costs, the product concept seeks to achieve the same result via product excellence – 
improved products, new products and ideally designed and engineered products. It also places 
emphases on the quality assurance. Organizations that are guided by product concept believe 
that consumers automatically go for products of high quality. They concentrate on achieving 
product excellence. They spend considerable amount of money and time on research and 
development activities in order to produce product of excellence. Yet, in many cases these 
organizations fail in the market because they do not study the market and the consumers in 
depth. They totally get engrossed with the product and almost forget the consumer, for whom 
the product is manufactured, they fail to find what the consumers actually need and would 
gladly accept. 
 
 
 
 
3. The Sales Concept: 
 The sales or selling concept says that consumers will not buy enough of the 
organizations product unless it undertakes the large scale selling and promotion effort. It 
cannot expect its products to get picked up automatically by the customers. The company has to 
consciously push its products. Aggressive promotion and advertising, price discounts and 
publicity and public relations are the tools that increase sales. However, sales without 
satisfaction of consumers may be counter productive in the long run. 
 
4. The Marketing Concept: 
 The marketing concept represents a radically new approach to business and is the most 
advanced of all the ideas of marketing that have emerged over years. Only marketing concept is 
capable of keeping the organization free from “marketing myopia”. All others viz. exchange 
concept, production concept, product concept and selling concept suffers from marketing 
myopia in one form or the other. The marketing concept has four major distinguishing features 
 a) Consumer orientation: An overwhelming emphasis on the consumer and his needs is the first 
distinguishing characteristic of marketing concept. It enables the firm to look at a business 
activity from the point of view of customer.  
b) Integrated management action: Integrated management action simply means that all the 
different management functions are tightly integrated with one another, keeping marketing as 
the pivot. For example, marketing department may have identified that there is going to be 
increase in the demand of certain product with some modifications. This information is sent to 
the manufacturing department that in turn informs purchase, inventory and other related 
departments, so as to produce the best benefits and satisfaction to the consumers.  
c) Consumer satisfaction: Marketing concept is a means for fulfilling consumer’s needs. It 
emphasizes that just consumer orientation of firm is not enough; it is essential that such an 
orientation lead to consumer satisfaction and no firm can afford to ignore it. 
 d) Realizing organizational goals including profits: The marketing concept treats consumer 
satisfaction as pathway of attainment of other goals of the organization. The firm tries its 
maximum to control costs and simultaneously ensure quality, optimize productivity and 
maintain a good organization climate and profitability. 
 
5. The Societal Marketing Concept: 
 The societal marketing concept holds that the organization should determine the needs, 
wants and interests of target market. It should then deliver superior value to the consumers in a 
way that maintains and improves the consumers and society’s well being. It questions whether 
the pure market concept is adequate in an age of environmental problems, resource shortages, 
rapid population growth, worldwide economic problems and neglected social services. 
Consider, for example, most of the industries are just garbaging the by-product in the soil or are 
drained away in the river causing water and soil pollution. This causes lot of health related 
problems to the people. Such concerns led to the emergence of societal marketing concept. The 
societal marketing concept calls on business people to balance three considerations in setting 
their marketing policies: company profits, consumer’s wants and society’s interests. 
 
 
 
MARKETING MIX: 
 
Marketing mix is the mixture of the essential elements of marketing in order to enhance 
consumer satisfaction. Marketing mix is the mixture of 4Ps’ – Product, Pricing, Promotion and 
Place (Physical distribution and channel of distribution). To attain success in marketing effort, 
the various components should be well coordinated. Marketing mix offers an optimum 
combination of all marketing elements so that we can achieve company goals such as profit, 
return on investment, sales volume, and market shares and so on. The market mix will 
naturally be changing according to changing marketing conditions and also with changing 
environmental factors such as technical, social, economic, and political and competition. 
 
Elements of Marketing Mix: The elements of marketing mix are described below: 
 
(i) Product: Product means anything which can satisfy consumers needs and wants through 
exchange process. It provides economic utility and socio-psychological advantages. The 
marketer may offer a single product or several products. The marketer should also revise the 
product design, make improvements in the products frequently so as to suit the changing tastes, 
habits and preferences of the consumers. Packaging and branding decisions are also included in 
product decision. 
 
(ii) Price: Price is the value which is paid by the buyer to the manufacturer in exchange of the 
products and services. The marketer has to take into consideration the cost factors, profit 
margin, the possibility of sales at different price level and the competitors pricing policy as 
well as number of competitors. 
 
(iii) Promotion: The marketers should provide information to the customers about its products 
and services and motivate customers to buy. Advertising, personal selling, publicity and other 
sales promotional programs are the various promotional activities. All these activities increase 
the volume of sales by expending as well as retaining the market share for the products. 
Basically, promotion deals with no price competition in the market. Promotion is done for three 
purposes – (a) informing, (b) persuading and (c) influencing consumers.  
 
(iv) Physical Distribution: Distribution is the delivery of the product and transfer of ownership 
to the buyers and consumers. It includes channels and outlets through which products move to 
the buyer and arranging their physical movement to different market segments. It depends 
upon the middlemen, products and services, channels of distribution etc. It maintains the flow of 
products and services from the producers to the buyers. The combination of all the ingredients 
of marketing mix is shown in the following figure: 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
 
MARKETING ENVIRONMENT: 
 
Meaning of Marketing Environment:  
The marketing environment refers to all internal and external factors, which directly or 
indirectly influence the organization’s decisions related to marketing activities. Internal factors 
are within the control of an organization; whereas, external factors do not fall within its control. 
The external factors include government, technological, economical, social, and competitive 
forces; whereas, organization’s strengths, weaknesses, and competencies form the part of 
internal factors.  
Marketers try to predict the changes, which might take place in future, by monitoring 
the marketing environment. These changes may create threats and opportunities for the 
business. With these changes, marketers continue to modify their strategies and plans. 
 
 2. Features of Marketing Environment:  
 
 2.1. Specific and General Forces: It refers to different forces that affect the marketing 
environment. Specific forces include those forces, which directly affect the activities of the 
organization. Examples of specific forces are customers and investors. General forces are those 
forces, which indirectly affect the organization. Examples of general forces are social, political, 
legal, and technological factors.  
2.2 Complexity: It implies that a marketing environment include number of factors, conditions, 
and influences. The interaction among all these elements makes the marketing environment 
complex in nature.  
2.3. Vibrancy: Vibrancy implies the dynamic nature of the marketing environment. A large 
number of forces outline the marketing environment, which does not remain stable and changes 
over time. Marketers may have the ability to control some of the forces; however, they fail to 
control all the forces. However, understanding the vibrant nature of marketing environment 
may give an opportunity to marketers to gain edge over competitors.  
2.4. Uncertainty: It implies that market forces are unpredictable in nature. Every marketer tries 
to predict market forces to make strategies and update their plans. It may be difficult to predict 
some of the changes, which occurs frequently. For example, customer tastes for clothes change 
frequently. Thus, fashion industry suffers a great uncertainty. The fashion may live for few days 
or may be years.  
2.5. Relativity: It explains the reasons for differences in demand in different countries. The 
product demand of any particular industry, organization, or product may vary depending upon 
the country, region, or culture. For example, sarees are the traditional dress of women in India, 
thus, it is always in demand. However, in any other western country the demand of saree may 
be zero. 
 
 3. Types of Marketing Environment: The sale of an organization depends on its marketing 
activities, which in turn depends on the marketing environment. The marketing environment 
consists of forces that are beyond the control of an organization but influences its marketing 
activities. The marketing environment is dynamic in nature.  
Therefore, an organization needs to keep itself updated to modify its marketing activities as per 
the requirement of the marketing environment. Any change in marketing environment brings 
threats and opportunities for the organization. An analysis of these changes is essential for the 
survival of the organization in the long run.  
A marketing environment mostly comprises of the following types of environment: 
 1. Micro Environment  
2. Macro Environment  
 
 
 
 
 
 
Micro Environment: Micro environment refers to the environment, which is closely linked to 
the organization, and directly affects organizational activities. It can be divided into supply side 
and demand side environment. Supply side environment includes the suppliers, marketing 
intermediaries, and competitors who offer raw materials or supply products. On the other hand, 
demand side environment includes customers who consume products.  
Let us discuss the micro environment forces in the following points:  
 
i. Suppliers: It provides raw material to produce goods and services. Suppliers can influence the 
profit of an organization because the price of raw material determines the final price of the 
product. Organizations need to monitor suppliers on a regular basis to know the supply 
shortages and change in the price of inputs.  
ii. Marketing Intermediaries: It helps organizations in establishing a link with customers. They 
help in promoting, selling, and distributing products.  
Marketing intermediaries include the following:  
a. Resellers: It purchases the products from the organizations and sell to the customers. 
 Examples of resellers are wholesalers and retailers.  
b. Distribution Centers: It helps organizations to store the goods. A warehouse is an 
example of distribution center.  
c. Marketing Agencies: It promotes the organization’s products by making the customers 
aware about benefits of products. An advertising agency is an example of marketing agency.  
d. Financial Intermediaries: It provides finance for the business transactions. Examples 
of financial intermediaries are banks, credit organizations, and insurance organizations. 
  
iii. Customers: Customers buy the product of the organization for final consumption. The main 
goal of an organization is customer satisfaction. The organization undertakes the research and 
development activities to analyze the needs of customers and manufacture products according 
to those needs.  
iv. Competitors: It helps an organization to differentiate its product to maintain position in the 
market. Competition refers to a situation where various organizations offer similar products 
and try to gain market share by adopting different marketing strategies. 
 
Macro Environment: 
 Macro environment involves a set of environmental factors that is beyond the control of an 
organization. These factors influence the organizational activities to a significant extent. Macro 
environment is subject to constant change. The changes in macro environment bring 
opportunities and threats in an organization. Let us discuss these factors in details:  
 
i. 
Demographic Environment: Demographic environment is the scientific study of 
human population in terms of elements, such as age, gender, education, occupation, 
income, and location. It also includes the increasing role of women and technology. 
These elements are also called as demographic variables. Before marketing a 
product, a marketer collects the information to find the suitable market for the 
product. Demographic environment is responsible for the variation in the tastes and 
preferences and buying patterns of individuals. The changes in demographic Page 4 
of 15 environment persuade an organization to modify marketing strategies to 
address the altering needs of customers.  
 
ii. 
Economic Environment: Economic environment affects the organization’s costs 
structure and customers’ purchasing power. The purchasing power of a customer 
depends on the current income, prices of the product, savings, and credit 
availability.  
 
 
The factors economic environment is as follows:  
a. Inflation: It influences the customers’ demand for different products. For 
example, higher petrol prices lead to a fall in demand for cars.  
b. Interest Rates: It determines the borrowing activities of the organization. For 
example, increase in interest rates for loan may lead organizations to cut their important 
activities. 
 c. Unemployment: It leads to a no income state, which affects the purchasing 
power of an individual.  
d. Customer Income: It regulates the buying behavior of a customer. The change 
in the customer’s income leads to changed spending patterns for the products, such as 
food and clothing. 
 e. Monetary and Fiscal Policy: It affects all the organizations. The monetary 
policy stabilizes the economy by controlling the interest rates and money supply in an 
economy; whereas, fiscal policy regulates the government spending in various areas by 
collecting the revenue from the citizens by taxing their income.  
 
iii. Natural Environment: Natural environment consists of natural resources, which are 
needed as raw materials to manufacture products by the organization. The marketing 
activities affect these natural resources, such as depletion of ozone layer due to the use 
of chemicals. The corrosion of the natural environment is increasing day-by-day and is 
becoming a global problem. Following natural factors affect the marketing activities of 
an organization in a great way:  
a. Natural Resources: It serves as raw material for manufacturing various 
products. Every organization consumes natural resources for the production of its 
products. Organizations are realizing the problem of depletion of resources and trying 
best to use these resources judiciously. Thus, some organizations have indulged in de-
marketing their products. For example, Indian Oil Corporation (IOC) tries to reduce the 
demand for its products by promoting advertisements, such as Save Oil, Save India.  
b. Weather: It leads to opportunities or threats for the organizations. For 
example, in summer, demand for water coolers, air conditioners, cotton clothes, and 
water increases while in winter, the demand for woolen clothes and room heaters rises. 
The marketing environment is greatly influenced by the weather conditions of a 
country.  
c. Pollution: It includes air, water, and noise pollution, which lead to 
environmental degradation. Now-a-days, organizations tend to promote environment 
friendly products through its marketing activities. For example, the organizations 
promote the usage of jute and paper bags instead of plastic bags.  
 
iii. 
Socio-Cultural Environment: Socio-cultural environment comprises forces, such as 
society’s basic values, attitudes, perception, and behavior. These forces help in 
determining that what type of products customers prefer, what influences the 
purchase attitude or decision, which brand they prefer, and at what time they buy 
the products. The socio-cultural environment explains the characteristics of the 
society in which the organization exists. The analysis of socio-cultural environment 
helps an organization in identifying the threats and opportunities in an organization. 
For example, the lifestyles of people are changing day-by-day. Now, the women are 
perceived as an active earning member of the family. If all the members of a family 
are working then the family has less time to spend for shopping. This has led to the 
development of shopping malls and super markets, where individuals could get 
everything under one roof to save their time.  
 
 
v. Technological Environment: Technology contributes to the economic growth of a 
country. It has become an indispensible part of our lives. Organizations that fail to track 
ongoing technological changes find it difficult to survive in today’s competitive 
environment. Technology acts as a rapidly changing force, which creates new 
opportunities for the marketers to acquire the market share. Marketers with the help of 
technology can create and deliver products matching the life style of customers. Thus, 
marketers should observe the changing trends in technology. 
 
CONSUMER MARKET AND BUYING BEHAVIOUR: 
Consumers are individuals & households who buy goods and services for 
personal consumption. All these consumers make up the consumer market. 
 
“Consumer behaviour is the actions a person takes in purchasing and using products 
and services, including the mental and social processes that precede and follow these 
actions” 
 
Model of Buyer Behaviour: 
 
 
 
MARKET SEGMENTATION 
Market segmentation involves grouping your various customers into segments that have 
common needs or will respond similarly to a marketing action. Each segment will 
respond to a different marketing mix strategy, with each offering alternate growth and 
profit opportunities. Some different ways you can segment your market include the 
following; 
 
Demographics which focuses on the characteristics of the customer. For example 
age, gender, income bracket, education, job and cultural background. 
 
Psychographics which refers to the customer group's lifestyle. For example, their 
social class, lifestyle, personality, opinions, and attitudes. 
 
Behaviour which is based on customer behaviour. For example, online shoppers, 
shopping centre customers, brand preference and prior purchases. 
 
Geographical location such as continent, country, state, province, city or rural 
that the customer group resides. 
Requirement of Market Segments 
Identifiable – the differentiating attributes of the segments must be measurable so 
that they can be identified 
Accessible – the segments must be reachable through communication and distribution 
channels 
Substantial- the segments should be sufficiently large to justify the resources required 
to target them 
Unique needs : To justify separate offerings, the segments must respond differently to 
the different marketing mixes 
Durable – the segments should be relatively stable to minimize the cost of 
frequent changes. 
 
TARGETING 
After segmenting the market based on the different groups and classes, you will need to 
choose your targets. No one strategy will suit all consumer groups, so being able to 
develop 
specific strategies for your target markets is very important.  
There are three general strategies for selecting 
your target markets: 
 
Undifferentiated Targeting: This approach views the market as one group with no 
individual segments, therefore using a single marketing strategy. This strategy may be 
useful for a business or product with little competition where you may not need to tailor 
strategies for different preferences. 
Concentrated Targeting: This approach focuses on selecting a particular market niche on 
which marketing efforts are targeted. Your firm is focusing on a single segment so you 
can 
concentrate on understanding the needs and wants of that particular market intimately. 
Small firms often benefit from this strategy as focusing on one segment enables them to 
compete effectively against larger firms. 
Multi-Segment Targeting: This approach is used if you need to focus on two or more 
well defined market segments and want to develop different strategies for them. Multi 
segment targeting offers many benefits but can be costly as it involves greater input 
from management, increased market research and increased promotional strategies. 
Prior to selecting a particular targeting strategy, you should perform a cost benefit 
analysis 
between all available strategies and determine which will suit your situation best. 
 
POSITIONING 
Positioning is developing a product and brand image in the minds of consumers. It can 
also 
include improving a customer's perception about the experience they will have if they 
choose to purchase your product or service. The business can positively influence the 
perceptions of its chosen customer base through strategic promotional activities and by 
carefully defining 
your business' marketing mix. Effective positioning involves a good understanding of 
competing products and the benefits that are sought by your target market. It also 
requires you to identify a differential advantage with which it will deliver the required 
benefits to the market effectively against the competition. Business should aim to define 
themselves in the eyes of their customers in regards to their competition. 
